# HPPD Herbicides

By 2050, global food demand will increase by a projected 70% compared to
2009 [@food2009high]. 12% of the Earth's ice-free land is already
cultivated for crops and the potential for expanding this area is
limited [@licker2010mind][@food2009high].

The 'yield gap' is the difference between the predicted maximum yield of
a given crop in a given area, and the actual yield in that area. Yield
gaps are often largest in under-developed agricultural systems that lack
suitable irrigation, chemical fertilizer and crop protection
[@licker2010mind]. The most significant contributor to yield loss is
weeds, which can reduce yields by up to 80% in some crops if no action
is taken [@oerke2006crop].

Herbicides kill weeds by disrupting key metabolic processes in the
plant. No new classes of herbicide have been developed since 1998,
whilst multiple-herbicide resistant 'superweeds' are a growing problem
worldwide [@norsworthy2012reducing]. High application rates of multiple
mechanisms of action is an effective strategy to manage herbicide
resistant weeds, but is limited by the crops' intrinsic tolerance to the
herbicide treatments.

Crops with engineered multiple herbicide resistance are the most
effective weed management strategy since they allow high application
rates of multiple classes of herbicide, minimising the probability of
herbicide resistant weed outbreaks [@green2012benefits]. Herbicide
resistant crops are generated by:

1.  Target site resistance: In this case the crop is transformed with an
    enzyme with the same biochemical function as the herbicide target
    site, but is not herbicide-sensitive, creating a 'metabolic bypass.'

2.  Metabolic enhancement: Crops can be transformed with enzymes that
    degrade herbicides into a non-phytotoxic product.

### HPPD Herbicides

4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate Dioxygenase (HPPD, EC1.13.11.27) is an important
herbicide target and an area of interest for generating herbicide
resistant crops. HPPD inhibitors are commonly deployed in cereal crops,
which tolerate HPPD inhibitors better than broadleaf weeds and therefore
allows preferential toxicity towards weeds. HPPD inhibitors are the last
class of herbicides to have been discovered and are popular because of
the broad spectrum of weeds that they are toxic to and because they can
synergise with other herbicides, leading to the development of herbicide
mixtures that allow greater application flexibility and minimise the
chance of weeds developing herbicide resistance [@kaundun2017mechanism].

HPPD is ubiquitous to aerobic organisms and catalyses the transformation
of 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate to homogentisate, an important step in
tyrosine catabolism [@moran20054]. In plants, homogentisate is a
precursor to both plastoquinone and α tocopherol [@soll1980tocopherol].

Plastoquinone is an essential cofactor for the synthesis of carotenoids
and in the coupling of photosystem I and II. Carotenoids are accessory
light harvesting pigments that prevent generation of ROS by quenching
high energy triplet-state chlorophyll b. Additionally, β-carotene is a
structural element of the photosystem II core, depletion of β-carotene
causes the release of chlorophyll which is phototoxic in its free state
[@kramer2007modern]. Damage from HPPD-inhibition is exacerbated by
depletion of α tocopherol, an important amphipathic antioxidant that
quenches reactive oxygen species generated during uncoupled
photosynthesis and scavenges lipid peroxyl radicals [@munne2005role].

#### HPPD Inhibitors

All known potent HPPD inhibitors contain a 1, 3 diketone moiety
[@kaundun2017mechanism]. The crystal structure of tobacco (nt) HPPD with
an experimental diketone inhibitor *(DAS869)* bound revealed that
octahedral coordination of the catalytic Fe^2+^ was required for tight
binding [@yang2004structural]. Binding is also mediated by π-stacking of
the benzoyl moiety of the inhibitor between two phenylalanine residues
in the binding pocket.

HPPD inhibitors can be identified in vitro high throughput screens, such
as that described by [@yang2004structural] who used a partially purified
homogentisate dioxygenase from Achromobacter xylosoxidans to couple
homogentisate production to maleylacetoacetate. Production of
maleylacetoacetate results in an increased absorbance at 300 nm,
allowing the assay to be carried out in a microtiter plate and tracked
by a plate reader. A more recent advance in HPPD-inhibitor screen is a
bacterial bioassay [@rocaboy2014novel] that takes advantage of the
accumulation of a brown melanin-like pigment in E. coli cells that
overexpress a plant HPPD gene; incubation with a potent HPPD inhibitor
prevents the formation of the melanin-like pigment and allows
determination of IC50 accurate in the sub-micromolar range.

Maize can rapidly metabolize HPPD inhibitors like mesotrione, which
allows farmers to use this class of inhibitor as a selective herbicides
[@hawkes2001mesotrionea]. The essential role of cytochrome P450s in
herbicide metabolism was elucidated by co-application of mesotrione with
the P450 inhibitor malathion, and the subsequent discovery of the
4-hydroxy-mesotrione metabolite [@hawkes2001mesotrionea]. Outbreaks of
mesotrione-resistant weeds *(Aramanthus spp.)* have appeared in
continuous corn seed production fields which have received repeated low
doses of the herbicide [@hausman2011resistance]. Like corn, the
mesotrione-resistant Aramanthus spp. tolerated high doses of the
herbicide via metabolic inactivation by 5-hydroxylation of mesotrione,
which suggests that a P450 may be responsible [@kaundun2017mechanism].

#### HPPD-inhibitor Resistant Crops

In 2013 a Syngenta and Bayer submitted a transgenic soybean *(Glycine
max L.)* dubbed the *MGI Soybean* with engineered HPPD-inhibitor
tolerance for regulatory review [@syngenra2013mgi]. This represents an
important technology for farmers, since in the major maize-growing areas
of the United States (the 'Corn Belt') maize crops are immediately
followed by Soybean in 75% of cases [@hawkes2007epa]. Soybean is
extremely sensitive to residual HPPD-inhibitors that may persist in the
soil, so it is important to produce a variety of Soybean that can
tolerate this class of herbicide to allow safe crop rotation and
herbicide application flexibility.

In 2007, Tim Hawkes' team at Syngenta filed patents in the US, Europe
and China for several genes that were capable of conferring
HPPD-inhibitor resistance to otherwise susceptible crops
[@hawkes2007epa]. One of the patented genes was an HPPD variant cloned
from wild oats *(Avena fatua)* which is mildly tolerant towards
HPPD-inhibiting herbicides. The gene was subject to a combination of
site-directed mutagenesis, random mutagenesis and gene shuffling. The
resultant mutants were screened by transformation into E. coli cells
plated on media supplemented with tyrosine and an HPPD-inhibiting
herbicide in similar stead to the aforementioned bacterial bioassay for
HPPD inhibitors [@rocaboy2014novel]. Colonies that accumulated a
melanin-like pigment in the presence of the herbicide were considered to
be herbicide-tolerant.

To further the level of herbicide tolerance in the proposed line of
Soybean, Hawkes' team identified several putative P450s capable of
metabolising herbicides by comparing quantitative trait loci (QTLs) from
inbred lines of maize that had differing levels of tolerance to
HPPD-inhibitor mesotrione and acetolactate-synthase inhibitor
nicosulfuron. Expression and analysis of bacterial artificial
chromosomes generated from the QTLs yielded a P450 with activity towards
nicosulfuron ('Maize NSFL') and one with activity towards mesotrione
(CYP72A1).

The CYP72A family of P450 monooxygenases have a broad range of
biological functions in plants, though a phylogenetic analysis by
[@prall2016utility] revealed insights into the functional regions of the
enzyme family such as the substrate recognition regions, they also found
that enzymes in this family can be modelled onto the human CYP3A4
structure with a relatively high predicted accuracy, which may be a
useful tool for producing mutants of this enzyme.

The patent also covers CYP81A6 from rice *(Oryza sativa L.)*, which had
been previously discovered to confer tolerance to benzaton - a
photosystem II inhibitor, and to the sulfonylurea class of acetolactate
synthase inhibitors [@zhang2007identification]. The product has not yet
reached the market.

Monooxygenation of herbicides by P450s is an important mechanism by
which crops tolerate herbicides [@siminszky2006plant]. P450-mediated
degradation of herbicides can be enhanced in crops by the application of
chemical 'safeners' to the seed coat or as a foliar spray. Safeners like
naphthalic anhydride induce expression of certain gene clusters that
tend to include P450s capable of herbicide metabolism [@davies1998mode].

Insertion of an oxygen into a herbicide can be sufficient to detoxify it
in itself, as in the case of mesotrione [@kaundun2017mechanism]. In
other cases, hydroxylation of the herbicide is followed by conjugation
with a bulky, hydrophilic molecule, such as glutathione and its
subsequent export from the cytosol into the vacuole or periplasm via an
ABC transporter [@yuan2007non]. In addition to the aforementioned MGI
soybeans, exogenous P450s have been used to confer herbicide tolerance
to rice *O. sativa*
[@kawahigashi2005enhanced][@kawahigashi2008transgenic], potatoes
(*Solanum tuberosum*)[@inui2005herbicide], tobacco *(N. tabacum)* and A.
thaliana [@didierjean2002engineering].

\bib
